[MUSIC]
[SOUND] In this lecture,
we'll talk about how to
generate a pulse width
modulated signal on a GPIO pin.
So, how to use the GPIO library,
the python GPIO library to generate
pulse with modulated signals.
And there are several
functions in the library, and
we'll talk about how you use those.
So, pulse width modulation
as a really quick recap.
[COUGH] The pulse width modulated
signal is just square wave, and
you can see in the picture
we got three square waves.
And the difference between these
three square waves is what's called
the pulse width.
Basically, how long they are high versus
how long they are low, the duty cycle.
So, if you look at these three square
waves,that they all three of them have
the same frequency.
If you look at the time when
the signal goes from zero to one,
it's the same on all three square ways.
So they have the same frequency,
and same period.
But they differ in how long,
what percentage of the time
their signal is high.
So the top wave form, it's high 75%
of the time, and low 25% of the time.
Then the middle one is 50/50, and
then the bottom one is 25% high, 75% low.
So that's called the duty cycle, what
percentage of time the signal is high.
And that's what you want to change
with pulse width modulation,
you don't change the frequency.
You use some constant, high frequency,
and you modify the pulse width.
The whole idea of this, is to control
an analog device from a digital circuit.
So our circuit, our Raspberry Pi,
it generates digital signals, high or low.
But there are some devices,
which respond to analog.
But we can't generate analog, cuz we don't
have a digital analog converter built in,
or not that we can use.
So, one way to deal with that is to
send a pulse width modulated signal.
You make the signal go from
high to low really fast.
Like in this case,
maybe 500 hertz or something.
Very fast,
faster than the analog device can respond.
So, let's say, this is a motor or
something like that.
This motor can't turn off and
on at that speed.
So what happens is,
it just moves at a speed
that corresponds to
the average duty cycle.
So, if the duty cycle's 75%, then
the average voltage that the device sees,
is going to be higher than
if you do your cycle,
say, 25%,
because its high much less of the time.
So, this is basically a digital way
to fake out devices expecting analog.
You can do that with digital, just
make it go high and low very fast, and
just change the percentage of time
that the signal is high or low.
So, let's go through the library that
we use to generate pulse with modulated
signals.
First thing you wanna do if you want to
generate pulse with modulated signal on
a pin, you gotta mark that pin.
You have to basically declare that,
that pin is going to be used for
pulse width modulation.
And this does something inside
the processor that we don't need to talk
about, but
you have to call this function, GPIO.PWM.
Now, GPIO.PWM takes two arguments.
First argument, is the pin that you wanna
set pulse width modulating signals on.
And the second argument,
is the frequency of the pulse width
modulating signal that you wanna generate.
So in this case, we're saying, look,
pin 18 is gonna get a pulse
width modulated signal.
It's frequency is gonna be 400 hertz.
Now, note that when you call this function
GPIO.PWM, when you call this function,
it does not right then and there generate
the pulse width modulated signal.
This only changes the internal
connections inside the processor, so
that the pulse width modulated
signals can be generated on pin 18.
But it doesn't actually
start generating it yet.
There's another function for that.
Another thing to note about
this function GPIO.PWM is
that it actually returns an object,
pwm_obj we're calling it.
Pwm_obj equals blah, so
that object is what you're gonna
use to make your method
calls in the future.
It is easier said, easier shown.
So, we've been sort of skirting this
idea of object orientated program.
We talked about it a little bit,
just very briefly, but
we're not getting heavily into it.
But here, it comes up again here.
What happens is this pwm_obj is
an object of a particular class, and
we can make method calls.
We can call functions that
just apply to that object, so
it's easier if I just show you.
So, once you make this pwm_obj object,
now maybe you wanna start generating
a pulse width modulated signal.
So, how do you do that?
You call it start function,
not this start, or it's a method.
This start method it is called,
is the call is prefixed with pwm_ obj,
so whatever object you got
returned from that GPIO.PWM call,
that object, you call this
start function on that object.
So, pwm_obj.start(100) takes one argument,
in this case 100.
So that argument indicates
the pulse width, the duty cycle.
So, the duty cycle goes from 0 to 100,
0% to 100%.
So, 100 duty cycle means
it is high all the time.
If you gave it 0,
that would be low all the time.
If you gave it 50 you would be high half
the time, low half the time, and so on.
So, once you call that start function,
that actually starts generating the pulse
width modulated signal on the pin.
Now, once you start generating
a pulse width modulated signal,
you can change the pulse width if you
want to while you're generating it.
And for that, you call ChangeDutyCycle.
Again, you call it on the pwm_obj object.
So, pwm_obj.ChangeDutyCycle(50) that
just assigns a new duty cycle of 50.
So, now I've changed it from 100
duty cycle, high all the time,
to a 50/50 duty cycle,
high half the time, low half the time.
You should note that the frequency is
not accurate on these Raspberry Pies.
So, actually this is very
different that the Arduino,
the frequency that you
get is not too accurate.
And it could be off by
a lot up to 50% when
you get to higher frequencies,
just know that.
What that means is that, if you really
need tight pulse width modulated control
you're gonna have to do something else.
There are other ways to go about it.
You can't use a standard library function,
if you want accuracy on a Raspberry Pi,
and part of the reason why you get this
inaccurate behavior is because you're
using an operating system.
The operating system has these delays that
are hard to know, and hard to predict.
But the Arduino has no delays, so
it's much better in terms
of real time performance.
You can get the delays
that you want directly.
You can do it too with Raspberry Pi,
but you almost have to circumvent
the operating system in a way that we'll
talk about, that's in next course.
Now, frequency control.
These pulse width modulated signals,
when you generate them,
you generate them at
a particular frequency.
So you can assign the frequency
when you mark that pin for for
being a pulse width modulated signal.
When you call GPI.PWM you pass
the frequency that you want,
400, say 400 hertz.
But you can't change that frequency
once you've created it, not easily.
You can't just say, okay,
now I want to go to 500 hertz, 600 hertz.
Now, if you're using pulse width
modulation you don't need
to change the frequency.
But it is nice to be able to
change frequencies because maybe
you wanna make tones.
Maybe you wanna make beautiful music,
and you wanna make different sounds,
different frequencies.
And then it would be nice to
be able to have a square wave
with frequency you could change.
Now, if you remember in Arduino,
we did this.
We had a tone function,
and this tone function you
couldn't change the duty cycle.
It was always 50/50, but
you could change the frequency.
And then we hooked it up to a buzzer,
and made different frequency sounds.
So, that was very convenient.
You don't have a built-in function for
that in the GPIO library.
So, what you have to do if you wanna do
that, if you want to make something where
you change its frequency,
you have to do it manually.
Got to do it the hard way.
So, what I mean by that is,
you actually have to adjust the delays
to make it the frequency you want.
So, here's an example.
You got your infinite while loop,
GPIO.output 18 equals True.
Then you sleep for 0.5, half a second.
GPIO.output 18, False.
Then you sleep for another half second.
So, what this gives you is a square wave,
high, low, and
whose frequency whose
period is one second.
Cuz you've slept for half a second, half
a second, so you've got a 1 second period,
which means a 1 hertz frequency.
So, this gives you a square
wave with a 1 hertz frequency.
So, by changing those time values you
can change the frequency manually.
You can compute what the period should be,
and you make the time value half of that.
And then you can get
whatever frequency you want.
So, if you want a more accurate frequency
control, your gonna have to do.
If you wanna be able to change frequency
control easier your gonna have to do
this manually.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]